# Assignment 3
Physics 141/241: Computational Physics I

Instructor: Javier Duarte

Spring 2023

_Due date for first version: May 26, 8pm_

_Due date for corrected version: May 31, 8pm_

Total points: 80

## Policies
You are free to collaborate on all the problems, subject to the collaboration policy stated in the syllabus.
You must submit all code used in the homework (if you don't there is a 50% penalty).
You are welcome to use Python, C/C++, or any other language you are comfortable with **within reason**.
Please comment your code such that the TA can follow along and run it without any issues.

The *first version* of the assignment will be graded on effort and completeness and is worth 50% of the total grade.
The *corrected version* of the assignment will be graded on effort and correctness and is worth 50% of the total grade.


## Submission Instructions
**PLEASE NOTE** that there are two steps to submitting your assignment.
Both must be submitted by the deadline.

- Please submit your report as a single `.pdf` file to Gradescope under **Assignment 3 Report** or **Assignment 3 Report Corrections**.
In the report, include any images generated by your code along with your answers to the questions.
  - For instructions specifically pertaining to the Gradescope submission process, see https://www.gradescope.com/get_started#student-submission.
- Please submit your code as a `.zip` archive to Gradescope under **Assignment 3 Code** or **Assignment 3 Code Corrections**. The `.zip` file should contain your code files for all problems. Submit your code either as `.ipynb`, `.py`, or `.c` files (etc.). Follow this naming conventions:
  - For code related to Problem 1(a), include a file named `problem1a.ipynb`, `problem1a.py`, or `problem1a.c` (etc.).

## Problem 1

Note: For running the $N$-body simulation you may use your own leapfrog based code or `gyrfalcOn`.
For creating the initial conditions you may use your code from Assignment 2 or `mkplummer` (and potentially editing the output).

(a) [30 points] Using your setup for the initial state of the Plummer sphere from Assignment 2 (or `mkplummer`), run
an $N$-body simulation over some time unit with 10,000 points.

Plot the kinetic, potential, and total energy of the Plummer sphere versus time.
Is it conserved?

(b) [30 points] Run the $N$-body simulation for a modified Plummer distribution where you set initially all velocities to zero. 

In your chosen time units, how long does it take to collapse and reach a new steady state?

Plot the kinetic, potential, and total energy versus time.

(c) [20 points] Make two separate movies over the same time period of the two simulations with (a) the steady state Plummer sphere and (b) the collapsing sphere Plummer.
Make the time period long enough that you can see the collapse.